---
title: "Unveiling social vibrancy in urban spaces with app usage"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2023-10-07-talk-2
venue: "Auditorium of Puerta de Toledo campus of Universidad Carlos III de Madrid"
date: 2023-10-06
location: "Madrid, Spain"
paperurl: 'https://tommycollins1.github.io/files/paper3.pdf'
---

[Download poster]('https://tommycollins1.github.io/files/unveiling_social_vibrancy_report_nm23.pdf')

[Download 'NetMob23 Book of Abstracts'](https://netmob.org/www23/book_of_abstract/book_of_abstract.pdf)



### Authors:
#### Thomas Collins (University of Exeter);
#### Diogo Pacheco (University of Exeter);
#### Riccardo Di Clemente (Northeastern University London; The Alan Turing Institute);
#### Federico Botta (University of Exeter; The Alan Turing Institute)

Abstract:
Urban vibrancy, reflecting the energetic pulse of a city, is intricately linked to how people engage with urban spaces and each other. In today's digital age, the widespread use of mobile apps has revolutionized daily interactions, influencing social connectivity, decision-making, and travel arrangements among other activities. However, the relationship between app usage patterns and urban spaces, as well as demographic characteristics, remains underexplored.

This talk delves into this intersection by utilizing app-usage data as a digital proxy to investigate these dynamics. Leveraging the NetMob23 dataset, which provides detailed spatiotemporal insights into app usage across the largest cities in France, we analyze how urban features derived from OpenStreetMap data and socioeconomic indicators from IRIS2000 subdivisions shape app usage behaviors.

Our approach integrates univariate spatial models and employs HDBSCAN clustering to uncover nuanced patterns in app usage related to work, education, and caregiving activities. Importantly, our analysis captures variations across cities and between weekdays and weekends, shedding light on the temporal dynamics of urban vibrancy.

Key findings highlight the significance of computational approaches in understanding urban environments, bridging sociological concepts with computational social science methodologies. By contextualizing app usage within urban contexts, our research underscores the evolving nature of urban vibrancy and its implications for designing more responsive and inclusive cities.

Key Points Covered:

App Usage as a Digital Signature: Exploring how mobile app usage patterns reflect urban dynamics and social behaviors.

Spatial Analysis Framework: Utilization of fine-grained IRIS2000 subdivisions to map urban features and socioeconomic indicators.

Temporal Variability: Analysis of differences in app usage behaviors between weekdays and weekends, highlighting dynamic urban rhythms.

Methodological Insights: Application of spatial modeling and clustering techniques to interpret complex urban data.

Implications for Urban Planning: Discussion on leveraging computational approaches for enhancing urban vibrancy and fostering social inclusion.

This presentation contributes to advancing our understanding of urban vibrancy through digital traces, offering actionable insights for policymakers, urban planners, and researchers striving to create more adaptive and equitable urban environments.
